docs: re-add `studio document validation` and change code snippet (#2276)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/tutorials/studio-document-validation.md

---
title: "Validate AsyncAPI document with Studio"

> description: This tutorial will teach you how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the AsyncAPI Studio tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the AsyncAPI Studio tool.
```

weight: 120
---

## Introduction

> This tutorial will teach you how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the [AsyncAPI Studio tool](https://studio.asyncapi.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the [AsyncAPI Studio tool](https://studio.asyncapi.com/).
```

> You will start with a broken AsyncAPI document and troubleshoot via console errors step-by-step until we end up with a valid AsyncAPI document. This process will illustrate how to identify [`REQUIRED` properties in AsyncAPI documents](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/latest#A2SObject).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will start with a broken AsyncAPI document and troubleshoot via console errors step-by-step until you end up with a valid AsyncAPI document. This process will illustrate identifying [`REQUIRED` properties in AsyncAPI documents](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/latest#A2SObject).
```

## Background context
An AsyncAPI document is a file that defines and annotates the different components of a specific Event-Driven API. The format of the file must be JSON or YAML. You can use this document to generate both documentation and code.

The AsyncAPI Studio tool allows you to develop an AsyncAPI document, validate it, preview it, convert it to the latest version, and visualize event flows.

Now let's experiment with an invalid file to see how errors are displayed and how to make that file valid again.

## Copy invalid AsyncAPI document

> Let's pretend we have an invalid AsyncAPI document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's pretend you have an invalid AsyncAPI document.
```

```yaml
asyncapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Streetlights API
  version: '1.0.0'
  description: |
    The Smartylighting Streetlights API allows you
    to remotely manage the city lights.
  license:
    name: Apache 2.0
    url: 'https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0'

servers:
  mosquitto:
    url: test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt

channels:
  lightMeasured:
    address: 'light/measured'
    messages:
      lightMeasuredMessage:
        name: LightMeasured
        payload:
          type: object
          properties:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: true
              description: Id of the streetlight.
            lumens:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Light intensity measured in lumens.
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.

operations:
  onLightMeasured:
    action: 'receive'
    summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
    channel:
      $ref: '#/channels/lightMeasured'
``` 
 
## Troubleshoot Studio errors

> Let's fix the errors one by one until we end up with a valid AsyncAPI document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's fix the errors one by one until you end up with a valid AsyncAPI document.
```

 
1. You can see the error message on the screen: `Empty or invalid document. Please fix errors/define AsyncAPI document.`

2. Open **DIAGNOSTICS**, you can see more information related to your errors.

3. Fix the incorrect server information. Use `host` instead of `url`
 
```yaml
servers:
  mosquitto:
    host: test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt
```
<Remember>
Notice how <b>description</b> property is missing; that doesn't make the AsyncAPI document invalid, but it's always better to include.
</Remember>

4. Read the next error: `"minimum" property type must be number`. Fix the `minimum` by changing it to: `0`.

```yaml
          properties:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
``` 
5. Congratulations! You identified and fixed all the errors, and now have a valid AsyncAPI document.

## Summary

> This tutorial taught us how to validate an AsyncAPI document using the AsyncAPI Studio tool. We also learned to troubleshoot an invalid AsyncAPI document by following the error message directions in diagnostics. In doing so, we learned how to identify `REQUIRED` properties in all AsyncAPI documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned how to validate an AsyncAPI document using the AsyncAPI Studio tool. You also learned to troubleshoot an invalid AsyncAPI document by following the error message directions in diagnostics. In doing so, you learned how to identify `REQUIRED` properties in all AsyncAPI documents.
```

description: This tutorial will teach you how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the AsyncAPI Studio tool.
weight: 120
---

## Introduction
This tutorial will teach you how to validate AsyncAPI documents using the [AsyncAPI Studio tool](https://studio.asyncapi.com/).

You will start with a broken AsyncAPI document and troubleshoot via console errors step-by-step until we end up with a valid AsyncAPI document. This process will illustrate how to identify [`REQUIRED` properties in AsyncAPI documents](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/latest#A2SObject).

## Background context
An AsyncAPI document is a file that defines and annotates the different components of a specific Event-Driven API. The format of the file must be JSON or YAML. You can use this document to generate both documentation and code.

The AsyncAPI Studio tool allows you to develop an AsyncAPI document, validate it, preview it, convert it to the latest version, and visualize event flows.

<Remember>

If you did not follow the previous tutorial and do not have an `asyncapi.yaml` file ready, then generate one using `asyncapi new --example=tutorial.yml --no-tty` command.

> </Remember>

Reviewer 2: I don't think this should be here in this tutorial as this tutorial is about validating invalid document in studio, basing on example provided in studio - and command under `remember` note talks about generating a valid document

Author: @derberg 
okay, so if the command generates a valid document, it should not be there. Any command to generate and invalid one? If not there is a way to generate one from AsyncAPI Studio as far as I've tested. Thoughts? :eyes:

Reviewer 2: nah, I will just remove it

</Remember>

2. Copy and paste the below invalid AsyncAPI document:

```yaml
asyncapi: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Streetlights API
  version: '1.0.0'
  description: |
    The Smartylighting Streetlights API allows you
    to remotely manage the city lights.
  license:
    name: Apache 2.0
    url: 'https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0'

servers:
  mosquitto:
    host: test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt

channels:
  lightMeasured:
    address: 'light/measured'
    messages:
      lightMeasuredMessage:
        name: LightMeasured
        payload:
          type: object
          properties:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Id of the streetlight.
            lumens:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Light intensity measured in lumens.
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.

operations:
  onLightMeasured:
    action: 'receive'
    summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.

>     operationId: onLightMeasured

Reviewer 2: `operationId` is no longer there, the name of the key that describes an operation is the same as operationId

Author: > `operationId` is no longer there, the name of the key that describes an operation is the same as operationId

Understood. I'm not much familiar with the structure of the file :sweat_smile: 

I guess it was resolved with a1bb873 am I correct?

Reviewer 2: yup

    channel:

>       $ref: '#/channels/lightMeasured'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
asyncapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Streetlights API
  version: '1.0.0'
  description: |
    The Smartylighting Streetlights API allows you
    to remotely manage the city lights.
  license:
    name: Apache 2.0
    url: 'https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0'

servers:
  mosquitto:
    url: test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt

channels:
  lightMeasured:
    address: 'light/measured'
    messages:
      lightMeasuredMessage:
        name: LightMeasured
        payload:
          type: object
          properties:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: true
              description: Id of the streetlight.
            lumens:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
              description: Light intensity measured in lumens.
            sentAt:
              type: string
              format: date-time
              description: Date and time when the message was sent.

operations:
  onLightMeasured:
    action: 'receive'
    summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
    channel:
      $ref: '#/channels/lightMeasured'
```

I suggest we have an error focused not on `asyncapi` property (as with previous versions it was good as all v2 versions were super similar. In v3 things are different, and the fact that someone would do `asyncapi: 1.0.0` with v3 document seems like unrealistic error

thus I suggest error is that someone put `url` instead of `host`

-> later instructions also commented to match such case

Author: resolved with a1bb873

``` 
 
## Troubleshoot Studio errors
Let's fix the errors one by one until we end up with a valid AsyncAPI document.
 
1. You can see the error message on the screen: `Empty or invalid document. Please fix errors/define AsyncAPI document.`

> 2. Open diagnostics, you can see more information related to your errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Open **DIAGNOSTICS**, you can see more information related to your errors.
```

this way it is clear that it refers to some tab/button/label in studio

Author: Understood. Resolved with f1bc190

> 3. Fix the incorrect AsyncAPI specification number to `3.0.0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Fix the incorrect server information. Use `host` instead of `url`
```

Author: resolved with 05ef63a

 
```yaml
asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: Account Service

>   version: 1.0.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
servers:
  mosquitto:
    host: test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt
```

Author: resolved with c5a7870

```
<Remember>
Notice how <b>description</b> property is missing; that doesn't make the AsyncAPI document invalid, but it's always better to include.
</Remember>

> 4. Read the next error: `must be number`. Fix the `minimum` by changing it to: `0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Read the next error: `"minimum" property type must be number`. Fix the `minimum` by changing it to: `0`.
```

Author: resolved with 7d725ec

```yaml
          properties:
            id:
              type: integer
              minimum: 0
``` 

> 5. You see three errors:
> - must be equal to one of the allowed values
> - must be array
> - must match a schema in `anyOf`
> 
> `anyOf` means it should match any one the above schemas then it is valid.
> 
> Now let's fix this error by changing the type to `string`
> 
> ```yaml
>             sentAt:
>               type: string
>               format: date-time
>               description: Date and time when the message was sent.
> ```
> 
> 6. Congratulations! You identified and fixed all the errors, and now have a valid AsyncAPI document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Congratulations! You identified and fixed all the errors, and now have a valid AsyncAPI document.
```

yeah, I don't think we need to showcase another error with schema, especially that these errors are a bit unclear

Author: hmm...this is a bit technical so you would know the best :sweat_smile:

Author: resolved with a4beea4

## Summary
This tutorial taught us how to validate an AsyncAPI document using the AsyncAPI Studio tool. We also learned to troubleshoot an invalid AsyncAPI document by following the error message directions in diagnostics. In doing so, we learned how to identify `REQUIRED` properties in all AsyncAPI documents.

## Next steps

> Now that you have completed this tutorial, go ahead to learn [generate AsyncAPI messages (events)](https://asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/generate-code) which you will be sending to your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have completed this tutorial, go ahead to learn [generate AsyncAPI messages (events)](/docs/tutorials/generate-code) which you will be sending to your application.
```

we should always use relative links

Author: > we should always use relative links

Understood.

Author: resolved with 27a0b69

> You may also enjoy reading our [AsyncAPI document validation guide](https://asyncapi.com/docs/guides/validate).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may also enjoy reading our [AsyncAPI document validation guide](/docs/guides/validate).
```

Author: relative links, understood this.

Author: resolved with 7a13c1b
